README.md, before:

# tokdu - Token Disk Usage Analyzer for LLMs

`tokdu` (Token Disk Usage) is a terminal-based utility that helps you analyze and visualize token usage in your codebase. Similar to the classic `du` (disk usage) command, tokdu shows you how many tokens your files and directories consume, which is essential when working with Large Language Models (LLMs) that have token limits.

[![tokdu demonstration](https://github.com/unitythemaker/tokdu/blob/main/assets/tokdu-demo.gif?raw=true)](https://github.com/unitythemaker/tokdu/blob/main/assets/tokdu-demo.mp4)

## Features

- 📊 Visualize token distribution across your project
- 🚀 Fast, asynchronous scanning with caching
- 🔍 Respects `.gitignore` rules
- ⏩ Skips binary files automatically
- 🧩 Uses OpenAI's `tiktoken` for accurate token counting
- 🎛️ Support for different models' tokenizers

## Installation

```bash
pip install tokdu
```

Or install from source:

```bash
git clone https://github.com/unitythemaker/tokdu.git
cd tokdu
pip install .
```

## Usage

Basic usage:

```bash
tokdu
```

This will start tokdu in the current directory.

Specify a starting directory:

```bash
tokdu /path/to/project
```

Use a specific tokenizer encoding:

```bash
tokdu --encoding cl100k_base
```

Use tokenization based on a specific model:

```bash
tokdu --model gpt-4o
```

## Navigation Controls

- **↑/↓ or j/k**: Navigate up/down
- **Enter**: Open selected directory
- **Backspace**: Go to parent directory
- **Page Up/Down**: Scroll by page
- **q**: Quit

## Why Count Tokens?

Large Language Models like GPT-4o have context window limits measured in tokens. When embedding code in prompts or using tools and IDEs like GitHub Copilot or Zed, understanding your project's token usage helps you:

- Stay within context window limits
- Optimize prompts for LLMs
- Identify areas to trim when sharing code with AI assistants

## Technical Details

- Uses OpenAI's `tiktoken` library for accurate token counting
- Tokenizers can be specified with either `--encoding` or `--model` flags
- Defaults to `o200k_base` encoding or `gpt-4o` model when not specified
- Scans directories asynchronously for better performance
- Caches results to avoid repeated scans

## Requirements

- Python 3
- tiktoken
- pathspec
- curses (built into Python standard library)

## License

MIT

## Author

Halil Tezcan KARABULUT ([@unitythemaker](https://github.com/unitythemaker))

Commit message:

feat: add Gemini tokenization support
Implement local tokenization for Google Gemini models via optional dependency. New command line flag --tokenizer allows selecting between OpenAI's tiktoken and Gemini's tokenizer. Updated documentation and examples to show usage with both tokenization systems.

README.md, after:

# tokdu - Token Disk Usage Analyzer for LLMs

`tokdu` (Token Disk Usage) is a terminal-based utility that helps you analyze and visualize token usage in your codebase. Similar to the classic `du` (disk usage) command, tokdu shows you how many tokens your files and directories consume, which is essential when working with Large Language Models (LLMs) that have token limits.

[![tokdu demonstration](https://github.com/unitythemaker/tokdu/blob/main/assets/tokdu-demo.gif?raw=true)](https://github.com/unitythemaker/tokdu/blob/main/assets/tokdu-demo.mp4)

## Features

- 📊 Visualize token distribution across your project
- 🚀 Fast, asynchronous scanning with caching
- 🔍 Respects `.gitignore` rules
- ⏩ Skips binary files automatically
- 🧩 Uses OpenAI's `tiktoken` for accurate token counting
- 🔄 Supports Google's Gemini local tokenization
- 🎛️ Support for different models' tokenizers

## Installation

```bash
pip install tokdu
```

For Gemini tokenization support:

```bash
pip install "tokdu[gemini]"
```

Or install from source:

```bash
git clone https://github.com/unitythemaker/tokdu.git
cd tokdu
pip install .
```

## Usage

Basic usage:

```bash
tokdu
```

This will start tokdu in the current directory.

Specify a starting directory:

```bash
tokdu /path/to/project
```

### Tokenizer Options

Use a specific tiktoken encoding:

```bash
tokdu --encoding cl100k_base
```

Use tokenization based on a specific model:

```bash
tokdu --model gpt-4o
```

Use Google's Gemini tokenizer:

```bash
tokdu --tokenizer gemini --model gemini-1.5-flash-001
```

## Navigation Controls

- **↑/↓ or j/k**: Navigate up/down
- **Enter**: Open selected directory
- **Backspace**: Go to parent directory
- **Page Up/Down**: Scroll by page
- **q**: Quit

## Why Count Tokens?

Large Language Models like GPT-4o and Gemini have context window limits measured in tokens. When embedding code in prompts or using tools and IDEs like GitHub Copilot or Zed, understanding your project's token usage helps you:

- Stay within context window limits
- Optimize prompts for LLMs
- Identify areas to trim when sharing code with AI assistants

## Tokenizer Support

- **OpenAI Tiktoken**: Used for OpenAI models (GPT-3.5, GPT-4, etc.)
- **Google Gemini**: Local tokenization for Gemini models (requires `google-cloud-aiplatform[tokenization]>=1.57.0`)

## Technical Details

- Uses OpenAI's `tiktoken` library for accurate token counting with OpenAI models
- Supports Google's Vertex AI SDK for local Gemini tokenization
- Tokenizers can be specified with `--encoding`, `--model`, or `--tokenizer` flags
- Defaults to `o200k_base` encoding or `gpt-4o` model when not specified
- Scans directories asynchronously for better performance
- Caches results to avoid repeated scans

## Requirements

- Python 3
- pathspec
- curses (built into Python standard library)
- tiktoken
- google-cloud-aiplatform[tokenization] (optional, for Gemini tokenization) - requires cmake to be installed

## License

MIT

## Author

Halil Tezcan KARABULUT ([@unitythemaker](https://github.com/unitythemaker))
